+++
categories = ['politics']
date = '2024-05-07T20:41:16+01:00'
description = 'What is happening to councils around the country, why are they going bankrupt?'
essays = ['policy', 'economics', 'councils']
keywords = ['policy', 'economics', 'councils']
slug = 'council-funding'
title = "The UK's council funding crisis"
+++

The way in which UK council funding problems are reported in the media is helpful only in obfuscating the source of the problems. As with most things political in the UK, the issue descends to tribal mudslinging with the media outlets ensuring to name the controlling political party in question in the headline, or first paragraph of their piece. In doing this, it frames the problem as purely party political and for many people the solution boils down to just choosing another party at the next election.

The parties themselves don't help matters. In the run-up to the recent local elections, I received a leaflet from the Liberal Democrats extolling their financial prowess while blaming the neighbouring city's financial problems on the Labour-led council. These cases are particularly frustrating, surely the short-term gains of political gamesmanship are not worth the longer-term damage that misleading the public inflicts. The councillors surely know how difficult the funding situation is nationwide, that's why nearly half of all councils believe they will have to issue Section 114{{< fn "As UK councils are [unable to declare](https://commonslibrary.parliament.uk/what-happens-if-a-council-goes-bankrupt/) bankruptcy, issuing a Section 114 notice restricts all spending to only the services councils are statutorily bound to provide." >}} notices in the next year, effectively declaring bankruptcy.

This framing from both the media and political parties has an impact, just look through the social media pages of any local council in the UK and the comment sections will be full to the brim of people angry at their council. They're angry at how taxpayer's money is being spent, angry at how much council tax they have to pay and angry that the services they rely on are getting worse. Take this comment on a post from my local council: "You get an increase in money from the Government every year. You get extra Council Tax from new houses being built every year. And yet you claim you have to make savings cuts every year. WHAT ARE YOU DOING WITH OUR MONEY THEN. IT JUST DOESN'T ADD UP ???". It perfectly mixes the narratives served by the media over recent years and that of local opposition parties who claim their competitors are simply crunching the numbers wrong. Council tax goes up every year and every few months whichever MP has the unfortunate task of being the Secretary of State for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities for that week announces yet more funding for councils, inevitably wrapped up in some fanfare and with some hefty numbers to boot. So what gives? Why are local authorities around the country in such dire straits and why are services getting worse?

## Austerity
It would seem like reductivism to state, simply, this is the fault of the Tories. I wouldn't be far wrong, however. David Cameron and George Osbourne's Austerity project set about cutting as much government spending as possible in some ill-guided attempt to strengthen the economy. That project has now been well and truly debunked and we are seeing the impacts of prolonged public spending restraint every single day. Local authorities were impacted by this cut in central government spending to the extent that, between 2009/10 and 2021/22, local authority spending power funded by central government reduced by [more than 50%](https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/The-local-government-finance-system-in-England-overview-and-challenges.pdf). Even taking into account rises in council tax, this spending power still sits at 26% less than it was in 2009/10. The [BBC predicts](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-66428191) that by 2026, councils around the country will have a collective funding shortfall of £5.2bn.

As councils responded to their new budget limitations, they started to reduce spending across the board. In the first half of the decade from 2010, these cuts to spending exceeded reductions in funding which allowed councils to build [some reserves](https://data.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/committeeevidence.svc/evidencedocument/housing-communities-and-local-government-committee/local-government-finance-and-the-2019-spending-review/written/99949.html). This can only go so far though, and as funding cuts continued, comparable cuts to services were becoming harder to find. Councils started to look elsewhere to increase the money coming in. Taking advantage of historically low interest rates, some councils took out cheap loans from the Public Works Loan Board and started to buy [commercial property](https://researchbriefings.files.parliament.uk/documents/CBP-8142/CBP-8142.pdf) with the intention of earning income from the rental yield. This practice wasn't new, but it expanded significantly post-2010. With reduced reserves and greater borrowing, come Covid-19 when commercial property use plummeted, councils saw a [huge reduction](https://www.theguardian.com/society/2020/jul/13/english-councils-rely-heavily-commercial-investments) in the profitability of these investments and yet another blow to their incomes.

To further fan the flames, inflation and subsequent interest rate hikes have piled more pressure onto local authority budgets. It's estimated that inflation alone added more than [£1bn](https://www.localgov.co.uk/Inflation-sees-councils-shortfall-climb-by-1bn/58194) to council spending last year. Liz Truss and Kwasi Kwarteng did a real number on local councils too. Their disastrous 'mini-budget' saw financial confidence in the UK plummet and interest rates spike. More than [fifty councils](https://www.theguardian.com/society/2024/feb/10/disastrous-truss-budget-forced-uk-councils-to-take-out-massive-loans-at-high-interest-rates?ref=mc.news) took out loans at between 4.77% and 5% interest in the wake of the Truss experiment, all of which came with 50-year terms. So now councils are saddled with expensive loans, some of which are required just to keep the lights on, and the added woes of servicing that debt.

And then we also need to look at the changing face of the nation. We have an aging population and a crumbling social care sector funded mostly via local authorities. As people now tend to live longer, their ongoing care needs have to be met somewhere, and this is usually through the local authority. Demand for child social care has also risen, with overall spend now up 17% since 2009/10. At the same time, the number of homeless households has more than doubled in that same period. While [these figures](https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/The-local-government-finance-system-in-England-overview-and-challenges.pdf) are surprising, if costs had maintained with inflation we wouldn't be in such a difficult position, but the cost of care has increased year on year way beyond that. The increase in costs doesn't seem to have gone to improving care, or paying care workers more, but to fattening the investment portfolios of the [private equity](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-59504521) firms that have their claws in the UK's essential care services.

## Funding Sources
When George Osbourne announced his plans to reduce central government funding grants he also announced that he intended to offer councils much more freedom, especially when it came to setting council tax rates. As part of the [Localism Act 2011](https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2011/20/contents/enacted), local authorities were able to raise council tax by up to 5% without the requirement for a referendum or central government approval.

This is, in theory, a good step to decentralising local authority funding streams. However, council tax is a lop-sided, outdated and regressive funding mechanism that benefits mainly affluent councils. A council with a high percentage of properties falling in the higher tax bands will inevitably gain more from rises in council tax. Alongside this, richer people are less likely to use the services that fall under the responsibility of the council as they can afford to explore their own options for things like social care. Throw into the mix the various exemptions and reductions in council-tax which mean that inner-city councils with generally lower numbers of full-paying recipients will see a [much smaller](https://ifs.org.uk/sites/default/files/output_url_files/7-What%2525E2%252580%252599s-happened-and-what%2525E2%252580%252599s-next-for-councils-.pdf) rise in tax receipts from a rise in rates.

So the councils in most need of increased funding, those that spend the most on their statutory responsibilities, find it more difficult to raise the funding needed to do so. The most deprived local authorities were the hardest hit by funding reductions cutting, on average, [14% more in local public](https://manchesteruniversitypress.co.uk/9781526173713/) health budgets when compared with the least deprived. Add on the effects of inflation on already pressed budgets and we find ourselves in the situation we do now - councils are unable to afford to continue in the way they are.

## What next?
We have a perfect storm of reduced funding and rental yields, increased borrowing and debt servicing costs, and a rise in the number of people using statutory services alongside an archaic and regressive tax providing essential funding streams for councils. This puts almost every council in the nation, not just those run by the party you don't like, in a position of having to make difficult decisions about the things they are funding or issuing a Section 114 notice.

As more Section 114 notices are issued, it gives central government greater reason to take more and more responsibility from local authorities, a step in the wrong direction. The UK is an outlier among our peers when it comes to decentralisation of local authority funding. In [2021](https://www.kdz.eu/en/news/blog/european-local-government-finances-and-local-autonomy), the percentage of local government revenue provided by central government in the UK was 68%. In France it sat at 22%, in Finland it was 31%, in Spain it was 38% and in Germany it was 41%. By being so reliant on central government for their funding, councils are beholden to the wider economic whims of the party in power. They are afforded less freedom to spend in the ways they and their local constituents need. We live in a fantastically diverse country, one in which local communities have equally diverse needs that cannot be met with one-size-fits-all fiscal policies.

We are headed for a crisis, and fast. As central government services crumble around us, so do those run by local authorities. Something needs to change to prevent the decades of problems that will follow a state unable to help its citizens. Council tax desperately needs overhauling to make the system more equitable, and political parties need to realise that it helps no-one by muddying the waters during election campaigns. Beyond front-line politics, media outlets should make a greater effort to shine a light on the source of the problems, rather that trying to score cheap political points.