+++
title = 'Election Thoughts'
date = 2024-07-09T21:11:21+01:00
categories = ['politics', 'elections', 'voting']
description = "My thoughts on last week's general election and the disproportionate result that was returned."
keywords = ['politics', 'elections', 'voting']
slug = 'election-thoughts'
+++

I have seen plenty of criticism about Labour's landslide victory in last week's general election; some of it warranted, some of it seemingly to justify intra-party tribalism, and some purely because of a limited understanding of the facts. On the surface, the story of this election looks to be more about a Tory loss than it does a Labour win; the collapse in the Tory vote share, which fell by a whopping 19.9 points, made the job of sweeping up seats across the country much easier for Labour. And, despite what looks like a resurgent performance for a party that has been out of government for 14 years, Labour's vote share increased by just 1.7 points. This modest shift in support would suggest a lukewarm reaction to the party that has just won the second-largest parliamentary majority since 1945, behind only Blair, and gained the second-highest number of seats at an election since Attlee. Was it simply fury at the Tories that gifted this election to Keir Starmer? As ever, the national picture does not tell the whole story.

## Labour's performance
The slight bump in vote share for Labour added more than 200 extra seats to their tally thanks, in part, to a more efficient spread of votes. In the 2019 election, Labour were able to secure some massive majorities; 10% of their elected MPs gained more than 70% of the vote share in their constituencies, compared with just 3% of Tories achieving the same. Of course, it is nice to have a large, comfortable majority, but it is functionally useless; the limitations of first-past-the-post mean that every vote beyond the number needed for a majority is wasted. Having huge majorities in a handful of constituencies is a great way to increase vote share but win a limited number of seats, just as Labour did in 2019.

Last week, several very safe Labour seats saw their majorities shrink quite dramatically. It is no secret that the Labour Party has moved rightward since Keir Starmer took the reins in 2020; these safe seats were generally in larger cities with a younger, more progressive electorate that clearly could not palate the 'red Tories'. The party had clearly calculated that in shifting to the right, they would need to accept losing support in traditionally safe seats in exchange for boosting support elsewhere. The increase in votes in the seats they picked up somewhat offset the losses of the 'wasted' votes in their safer seats, partly explaining the disparity between the tiny gain in vote share and the explosive up tick in seats won. Clearly support for Labour has increased in places across the country, but they have managed to pick up the most seats they can with the lowest number of votes, gaining a share of just 33.69%. This should set alarm bells ringing for everyone; we have a government in power with a massive majority and next to no electoral legitimacy.

## Tactical voting
The very nature of first-past-the-post means that parties must be tactical if they are to be successful. Labour's plan this time around certainly paid off come polling day, but at the expense of a lot of their more traditional base. However, Kier and co were not the only ones to make the most of a system whose claims of being a representative electoral mechanism hold about as much water as Iain Duncan Smith's claims to have won his seat on [merit](https://walthamforestecho.co.uk/2024/07/05/iain-duncan-smith-holds-chingford-and-woodford-green-amid-labour-and-shaheen-acrimony/). The Liberal Democrats managed to get their highest number of seats to date, as did the Green Party, who quadrupled their haul. Both parties understood the need to be efficient in their spread of votes. The Green Party's incredibly focussed campaign targeted just four seats, all of which they won, and in the process managed to reduce their ratio of votes to seats by nearly half; it took a little over 460,000 votes for the Greens to secure a seat. For labour this sat at 23,612, while for Reform this was more than 820,000.

I do not that think *all* the Liberal Democrat gains can be chalked up to an electoral master stroke; this election was as much about getting rid of the Tories as it was about anything else. More [than 45%](https://lordashcroftpolls.com/2024/07/how-britain-voted-and-why-my-post-vote-poll/) of Lib Dem voters picked the party because they gave the best chance of defeating the party they liked least. Grassroots campaigns spread throughout social media in the run-up to the election, promoting tactical voting and showing people which party they should vote for to unseat the Tories. This is not a healthy way for a democracy to function. I am not taking aim at those promoting tactical voting, I absolutely support the idea, but it is something that should *not* have to be done. The electorate should be able to pick the party they want to govern, the party that most closely aligns with their politics, and not forced into choosing the best option for unseating their rival.

## Rise of Reform
Labour have a lot to thank Reform for. Their meteoric rise in this year's election was part of the reason for the derisory performance of Rishi Sunak's party. Reform came second in 98 seats, demonstrating a genuine opportunity to establish a place in the UK's political landscape if they can keep the momentum up. Though, this task is easier said than done for a party that showed their infancy in the campaign through various missteps that stole the headlines for a number of days. It is made even more difficult with Nigel Farage at the helm, a man famously fickle and whose outspoken nature and questionable company may find him on the wrong side of the Commons Commissioner for Standards more than once. Not to mention serial defector Lee Anderson, who would happily jump ship immediately if things looked better elsewhere. If the party manages to usher in some professionalism and restraint, as well as some actual policies, they may well demonstrate a genuine challenge to the Tories on the right, something that has not existed in the UK for many a decade.

Plenty of people are incredibly worried about the rise of Reform, horrified at the electorate for even contemplating the populist outfit. I do not think their performance this time around suggests anything about a longer-term rightward shifting of the nation, but rather that they are the perfect protest vote for lost Tory voters. Nigel Farage's return to frontline UK politics, in a surprise announcement mere weeks before the vote, also served them well. Just as inexplicably as Boris Johnson's popularity, Farage seems to hold a particular place in many voters' hearts, and his announcement that he was running came at just the right time. Had he stayed away, I don't think the party would have performed nearly as well as it did. His candidacy managed to pull numerous apathetic Tory voters down to the polls instead of staying at home.

Reform took the third-highest number of votes, but gained just five seats. No matter your opinion on the party and its politics, everyone should be outraged by the disparity between the number of votes and the number of seats that FPTP produced in this circumstance. Sure, you can argue that a more concentrated effort in constituencies they had a realistic chance of winning would have perhaps reduced this; but, it is a farce that the Liberal Democrats received nearly 600,000 *fewer* votes, yet returned 67 *more* MPs. We should be defeating oppressive and reactionary politics on merit, by proving progressive policies to be the most effective for citizens, and not through electoral sleight of hand. As Thomas Paine stated in *Rights of Man*, "if those to whom power is delegated do well, they will be respected; if not, they will be despised".

## A Labour win?
It is clear from this election that the Tories were despised. This election saw a confluence of various circumstances that we may not see for many years to come; a historically unpopular incumbent party, an efficient and tactical strategy from opposition parties, tactical voting on a scale not seen before, and a genuine challenger to the Tories on the right. Yes, absolutely, this election was more about a Tory loss than it was about a Labour gain, but we shouldn't completely disregard the majority that Keir Starmer now commands. Rightly or wrongly, a victory of this scale would not have happened without major changes to the Labour Party that the leadership pushed through after 2019; the party is not the same one that stood against Boris Johnson, which leaves many on the left searching for a new home. The two-party system that dominates our politics means that parties must attempt at being a broad-church of opinions if they want to win elections, and in doing so, they alienate their more radical members, forcing them out to third parties.

The rise in third parties winning seats at this election was in spite of FPTP, not because of it. Both main parties received their lowest combined share of votes (57%) at any election since 1945 and still won nearly 82% of the seats. That is not an electoral system that works for the electorate; it is a system that breeds discontent and fury. We don't have to look far for the source of the increasing levels of distrust and anger aimed at our politicians. The Labour Party cannot become arrogant with the size of their majority and must understand that it was not achieved on the back of a massive shift in popular opinion throughout the country; rather by electoral tactics and a fury with the party in power. Keir Starmer must understand that if the Tories are to recover their traditional base—a task not beyond the realms of possibility—repeating this feat in five years' time will be considerably more difficult.

I really hope the Labour Party uses their five years in power to make real change. Already, a flurry of action has shown Rishi Sunak's government to have been completely ineffectual, and it is a nice change to see actual experts appointed to ministerial departments. We can hope that some stability in some key areas—Justice, Health, Education, to name a few—will provide the environment needed for things to improve. Beyond the sound governing that the country so definitely needs, Labour needs to lead the way in pushing for proportional representation in our electoral system. This election has laid bare the horrifically non-proportional nature of FPTP; if they put party ahead of country and decide to keep the system in place, they will be directly responsible for a future Tory or Reform majority that lacks a true mandate from the people. Yes, it is hypocritical to say it considering Labour's win lacks the legitimacy essential for a functioning democracy, but let this be the last time. Let people see their votes count for something and let them pick the party they want to win.
