+++
title = "Why the young don't vote"
date = 2024-07-04T21:39:40+01:00
categories = ['politics', 'voting', 'elections']
description = 'The youngest generations generally have the lowest turnout at elections, what gives?'
keywords = ['politics', 'voting', 'elections']
slug = 'the-young-dont-vote'
books = true
+++

Every system of government comprises a balance between legitimacy and efficiency. A government with a high level of legitimacy is one in which the citizens have given their popular support and leaders can govern with a strong mandate. Efficiency is about how quickly a government can find solutions to the myriad of problems facing the electorate. In an ideal world, a leaders will be both legitimate and efficient, but the theory goes that more of one will lead to less of the other. In a diverse society opinion is conflicted, in an effort to gain popular support from the citizens, the less efficient the government will be as the legislative process is hampered by compromise and negotiation. An absolute monarchy or dictatorship, on the other hand, is inherently efficient; decisions generally come from a single source and are not bogged down with canvassing popular opinion. Thomas Paine said in his 1776 pamphlet *Common Sense*:
> "absolute governments (tho' the disgrace of human nature) have this advantage with them, that they are simple; if the people suffer, they know the head from which their suffering springs, know likewise the remedy and are not bewildered by a variety of causes and cures".

Turning this view towards the UK, it is clear we have suffered from a lack of both [efficiency and legitimacy]({{< ref "/notes/supermajority-spin/" >}} "Supermajority Spin") for some time. Since 1945, only a single government has received more than 50% of the vote share at an election. That means that in 21 general elections, the *majority* of voters have voted for a party *other* than the one that gained power, clearly evidencing the lack of legitimacy in the UK system. We can thank our first-past-the-post electoral system for this; the winner-takes-all system awards the candidate with the most votes with a seat in the House of Commons. On the face of it, this sounds like a fair system, but it leads to huge amounts of wasted votes; in any given constituency, a vote for a candidate other than the winner is ignored. This system massively favours larger parties, those with geographically concentrated bases, and works against parties that sit on similar sides of the political spectrum.

Despite achieving two majorities{{< fn "In 2015-2017 and 2019-2024" >}} in the House of Commons in the past 14 years—and with them a ticket to efficient governing—the Tories have achieved very little that has positively impacted people's lives. I have spoken [before]({{< ref "/essays/delivery-problem/" >}} "The UK's delivery problem") about how governments struggle to deliver on their outsized promises. Elections play a huge role in this legislative paralysis; they breed short-term policymaking, as politicians govern with the next election in mind. Unable to implement any lasting, structural change for fear of being caught out come election time, parties are increasingly turning to issues that gain media coverage and don't require the machinations of an efficient state or large expenditures. The traditional media, all too happy to help, grabs onto stories pushed by the political classes and desperately whips up controversy and drama. This ensures that the public is focussed on things like conspiracy theories about [15-minute cities](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-66990302) or attacking the Trans community using the same old [tropes](https://www.thepinknews.com/2023/02/22/section-28-lgbtq-rights-stonewall/) that were used against the wider LGBT community decades ago.

## Electioneering breeds discontent
Parties know that to win votes, it's best to target the most populous groups that will actually turn up to vote; and in the UK the age group with the highest turnout in elections{{< fn "At every election since 1992 it has been [higher](https://www.ipsos.com/en-uk/how-voters-voted) than 70%" >}} is the over 65s. This large and reliable group of voters is also more right-leaning than their younger counterparts, dragging the Overton window—the policies that are politically acceptable to the electorate at any given time—rightward. This pandering for votes is why we end up with absurd policies like the pensions 'triple lock' which sees pensions increasing at a pace beyond that of workers' wages. Fourteen years of Tory governments has left pensioners around [£1,000](https://www.msn.com/en-gb/money/other/how-pensioners-became-the-biggest-winners-under-14-years-of-tory-rule/ar-BB1oU7DM) a year better off, while families with children are £780 *worse* off. In their pursuit of votes from the older generations, political parties are turning their backs on the younger voters who, understandably, are feeling increasingly left behind and pretty pissed off. It's a vicious cycle; The more the political classes bend to the older generations, the wider the disconnect becomes between them and the younger voters that will shape the future.

The limited legitimacy that our elections afford means that the—generally left leaning—younger generations have, since 2010, voted en masse for parties that haven't returned a majority in parliament. The age-old problem of a fractured, sometimes stubbornly doctrinaire left also plays a part{{< fn "Wendy Brown discusses this idea much better than I ever could in her 1999 essay [*Resisting Left Melancholy*](https://www.commonhouse.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/brown-melancholia-of-the-left.pdf)" >}} as, thanks to the limitations of first-past-the-post, being unable to build coalitions among parties of similar beliefs plays into the hands of larger parties on the other side. The right is good at taking the 'grin and bear it' view; they have an incredible ability to put aside their differences so that they can present a broad, cohesive coalition of ideas—just what the electorate wants.

With all this in mind, is it any wonder that younger people feel little point in voting? The political classes are focussed on the older, non-working generations and regardless of how many times they vote, the parties and politicians that the young want in power don't win. When conditions like this present themselves, the [populists step](https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/europpblog/2022/06/01/understanding-right-wing-populism-and-what-to-do-about-it/) in and offer solutions to the ills of society, claiming to be different to the rest. You can see why Reform are making such strides in this election campaign, and not just among 2019 Tory voters; people are looking for an alternative option, for something that will deliver.

## Rethinking our system
These problems aren't entirely isolated to younger voters. Turnout is [down](https://researchbriefings.files.parliament.uk/documents/CBP-8060/CBP-8060.pdf) among all generations in the UK, while levels of [distrust](https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/wellbeing/bulletins/trustingovernmentuk/2023) are on the rise. A record number of people have said they want a '[strong](https://assets.ctfassets.net/rdwvqctnt75b/7iQEHtrkIbLcrUkduGmo9b/cb429a657e97cad61e61853c05c8c4d1/Hansard-Society__Audit-of-Political-Engagement-16__2019-report.pdf)' leader that doesn't have to go through parliament to pass legislation. People around the country are screaming out for something to change, and it is clear the current system is not fit for purpose.

An obvious choice for reform would be our electoral system. First-past-the-post is archaic and skews elections, delivering us the two-party system that has been the norm for a century. Electoral reform is not in the interests of the Labour or Tory parties as they are the main beneficiaries of it. As the last [referendum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2011_United_Kingdom_Alternative_Vote_referendum) on electoral reform shows, a government that isn't interested in meaningful change can do the bare minimum and allow the status quo to continue while claiming a mandate from an uninformed electorate. To ensure a truly democratic debate around what is best *for* the people, decisions should be left *to* the people. As David Van Reybrouck sets out in his illuminating book *Against Elections*, the selection of public officials using a random representative sample—sortition—as a system of appointing Citizens Assemblies is something that can shake us free of the constraints of electoral democracy.

In Canada, Ontario and British Columbia both used this system to debate alternative electoral system in the 2000s; a few hundred citizens from various walks of life were brought together over a number of weeks and months to learn from experts, debate with each other and settle on a system they felt worked best for them. But, as Van Reybrouck points out, both provinces fell at the final hurdle in their attempt to usher in deliberative democracy; they allowed the decisions of these well-informed, representative bodies, free from political and media influence, to be put to a referendum. By doing so, the rest of the country was forced to hastily draw opinions that were bogged down with influence from the political classes whose careers depended on the continuation of the systems in place, and a media class who profits from controversy and scandal surrounding elections.

Despite these failures, we can see the beauty of deliberative democracy in that it allows citizens to have a direct part in shaping the country in which they live. Giving this vital opportunity over to members of the public builds the essential trust that a country's citizens must have with its political classes; knowing that they could have an opportunity to make real change in their country inevitably breeds pride. This also works the other way too in helping politicians to gain a better understanding and appreciation of the people they govern.

## Abolish the Lords, empower the people
As fantastic as one-off Citizens Assemblies would be to deliberate on matters of meta-political importance, there is no reason they cannot be integrated into our society on a more permanent basis. At all levels of government deliberative democracy can help to build bridges and forge stronger communities. The House of Lords has always been a body I have struggled with; I absolutely disagree with the idea of a selective and partially hereditary upper chamber. But, I also know that because its members do not have to think about elections, they are better placed to temper controversial legislation and offer genuine compromises. That is why, upon reading the ideas of Anthony Barnett and Peter Carty, suggesting reforming the House of Lords{{< fn "[*The Athenian Option: Radical Reform for the House of Lords*](https://www.wob.com/en-gb/books/anthony-barnett/athenian-option/9781845401399)" >}} into a deliberative body drawn by lots, I felt a spark of excitement.

They suggest a body that consists of a similar number of citizens to that of MPs in the Commons. These people would be chosen at random from a list of volunteers that anyone and everyone can put their name forward for. The final assembly will broadly match the demographic make-up of the country at large. Citizens within this *House of Peers*, as Barnett and Carty call it, will be paid at a similar level to MPs and will sit for three years, with a third of the body being replaced every year. With access to experts from every sector and the freedom to question politicians, the Peers will have a full understanding of the topics they are debating. In much the same way as they currently do, the House of Commons would still propose legislation, and the House of Peers would act in a way similar to that of the current Lords, reviewing and changing it as needed.

This is a truly exciting proposal that could do wonders for the long-term health of the country. In moving in this direction we seek to remove the power that elections hold over us. Despite the western world holding a view that democracy is synonymous with elections, the reality is that electoral democracy is leading us towards populism and oppression. While democracy without elections may seem like an oxymoron to us, to return to Thomas Paine:
> "[these] sentiments[...]are not yet sufficiently fashionable to procure them general favour; a long habit of not thinking a thing *wrong*, gives it a superficial appearance of being *right*, and raises at first a formidable outcry in defence of custom. But the tumult soon subsides. Time makes more converts than reason".
