+++
title = 'This is America'
date = 2024-11-07T21:09:21+01:00
categories = ['politics', 'elections', 'voting']
description = "How did the US elect Trump again?"
keywords = ['politics', 'elections', 'voting']
slug = 'this-is-america'
+++

When an election doesn't go the way I want it to, I usually blame the losing party; they clearly failed to persuade enough voters that they can be trusted to govern. Blaming the electorate means you are not ready to learn the lessons of that election–it's the easy way out. Doing so suggests your particular party or policies are inherently correct and deserving of winning and to disagree makes voters wrong. It obfuscates the realities that usually show a very key reason your party lost. That's my normal take on these things. But, seeing the results of the US General Election trickle through on Tuesday night, it was hard not to blame the electorate.

Going into Tuesday night, I was confident–call it naivety, call it ignorance{{< fn "Admittedly, I go in to most elections blissfully adamant that 'my party' will win, which has lead to disappointment a number of times..." >}}–but I truly believed the American people would reject fascism and hate and rally around a flawed, but comparatively regular candidate in Kamala Harris. Donald Trump ran a horrific campaign by any standards, but it was particularly gaffe-prone even compared with his previous attempts, and far more openly vitriolic. Ultimately, that didn't matter, and Trump won both the Electoral College and, for the first time, the popular vote.{{< fn "Becoming only the second Republican to win the popular vote since 1992, Bush 2004 being the other" >}}Republicans also look set to win majorities in the Senate and the House, demonstrating an overwhelming shift away from the incumbent party and providing the Republicans the fabled trifecta: the Presidency, the Senate and the House.

It is hard to see this election as anything other than an explicit vote of support for Trump and the horrific things he ran on: mass deportation, political violence against his enemies, control of the media and destruction of the civil service. These are things his campaign *said* they would do, not fears cooked up by his opposition. So is it the case that a majority people in the US are just not nice people, that they would rather the politics of hatred over a relatively centrist candidate? I don't think it is that easy. In my view, there were three main things that resulted in Trump's win: voters hate inflation; a not insignificant number of people simply will not vote for a female candidate; and a huge portion of the American public is not political and has little interest in elections.

## The Economy
Exit polls have shown that the main issue for most voters was the economy. Trump's campaign attacked Biden's record on the economy; time and again at campaign rallies he would remind people that gas and grocery prices had gone up. This is simple messaging, people can quite easily see that the prices at the gas pump or at the shop have increased. What the Trump campaign did well here was to stick this on Biden, levelling the blame for inflation at his door. Given most voters don't understand inflation or the levers available to governments to control it, you can see why people would believe this.

The reality is that for nearly two years now wages have increased at a greater rate than inflation. Median household income increased by 4% between 2022 and 2023 and continues to rise. More generally, the US economy is incredibly strong: unemployment is going down, GDP per capita is at an all-time high, inflation is trending downwards, and GDP growth continues to outperform the rest of the west. On paper, then, the US economy is doing well, so why did voters reject Biden under the proviso of pastures green?

Republicans benefit greatly from the same thing the Tories do: an innate perception that they are better on the economy than their opponents. This is despite evidence regularly pointing in the opposite direction, allowing them to highlight various economic issues and blindly scream that they can fix it. Trump has claimed a number of times that he would bring prices down, with no clear path to doing so, to the great support of voters. Let's ignore the risks of deflation. As I stated before, people can easily see that prices have increased and even if their wages are increasing, the negative perception of higher numbers at the till almost always outweighs the increase in their wages, something that is less obvious.

The electorate is, as I have [discussed previously]({{< ref "/essays/delivery-problem" >}} "The UK's delivery problem"), economically illiterate. When voters state their biggest electoral issue is the economy, but simply do not understand how it works, it is a recipe for disaster that a populist can very easily exploit. Inflation is the [_least worst_](https://www.ft.com/content/15e05322-a26d-4854-a234-44abd7ed7357) option when faced with huge supply shocks, such as those the world saw post Covid-19 and following Russia's invasion of Ukraine. When navigating these shocks, real wages fall as inflation increases–essentially, the money in your pockets buys less stuff at the shop. Central banks and governments could take a much stricter route on monetary and fiscal policy to try and keep inflation under control, but we would likely have to see wage cuts, unemployment and recession to account for these. I know which of these options I'd rather deal with. Knowing that the average voter has little grasp of the impacts and causes of inflation, or monetary and fiscal policy, politicians can lay the blame for increasing costs on the incumbent. It is much more difficult to explain why that blame is misplaced than it is to repeat the claim over and over.

This economic illiteracy also comes into play when you look at one of Trump's claimed solutions: tariffs. His campaign touts tariffs as the solution to America's trade deficit and falling rates of domestic manufacturing. By their explanation, protectionist tariffs of 20% on all imports will a) raise billions for the state, b) hurt importers, not consumers, and c) increase domestic manufacturing. History tells [another story](https://www.imf.org/-/media/Files/Publications/WP/2019/wp1909.ashx), in that tariffs will mostly be passed on to consumers, inevitable retaliatory measures from other nations can lead to widespread economic destruction, and domestic manufacturing also loses out when imports are needed to produce their products. Just look at the [Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smoot%E2%80%93Hawley_Tariff_Act) of 1930 which lead to a reduction of US exports and imports of nearly 67%{{< fn "Obviously, the Great Depression was a contributory factor here, but there is plenty to say that the Smoot-Hawley Act worsened the situation for the US." >}}. And yet, despite the mountains of evidence that show tariffs are bad for an economy, Trump managed to sway voters with the promise they would be good for America and bad for China.

I will briefly touch on Elon Musk here, my least favourite person on the planet. The tech billionaire, stock manipulator and serial liar decided his "I am not a political person" schtick wasn't going to do him so well and so he threw disgusting amounts of his ludicrous wealth at Trump's campaign. Musk has been touted to lead a "Department of Government Efficiency" which, in his pursuit of being crowned the Memelord, he hilariously{{< fn "Not." >}} shortened to "D.O.G.E", perfectly demonstrating that he is actually the most Divorced Dad that has ever existed and that years of being told "yes" does terrible things to your sense of shame.

In various interviews, Musk has claimed that there is around $2tn–yes, TRILLION–in savings he can make for the US Government. A bold claim for a nation that spends around $8tn a year. By his own admission, American people will have to go through some "temporary hardship" before it pays off. Of course, this large saving comes mostly from welfare spending, and this "temporary hardship" will impact the worst off in society. I am not sure anyone, let alone the largest economy on the planet, should be taking spending advice from a man that paid $44bn for Twitter–because he wasn't getting enough engagement–and then drove it into the ground so it is now worth 80% less and haemorrhaging users. Unrelated, but Musk has an amazing ability to make himself look like a fucking idiot, most recently in his star-jumps on stage at Trump rallies which, by all accounts, are supposed to make his body look like an 'X'. Gross.

## The Candidate
This was no regular US election; it was set to be a rematch of 2020, a showdown between Trump and Biden. That all changed when Biden dropped out of the race in July following mounting pressure in the media highlighting what some called "cognitive decline". Amazingly, all of that concern for cognitive aptitude and ability to do the job disappeared overnight when Biden dropped out, despite Trump demonstrating some increasingly concerning behaviours as the race moved onward.

Biden's VP Kamala Harris was the immediate front-runner, and garnered support from all wings of the Democratic party; she was ultimately chosen as the candidate at the DNC in August this year. To say it was a whirlwind campaign would be putting it lightly. Harris managed, in the space of around four months, to pull in upwards of $1bn–an eye-watering sum of money by any standards. In almost every campaign up and down the ballot, Republicans were outspent, but that clearly did not sway voters. It is always going to be difficult as the VP of an unpopular President, you are going to struggle to separate yourself from their record, but Harris really did hit the ground running.

Early on, it looked like the Trump campaign was struggling to pivot towards Harris, instead talking as if he was still fighting Biden. Harris seemed to be the more agile and relatable candidate, opening the door to voters usually sidelined by running on issues like abortion. But none of that seems to have mattered. Trump touted hate, spouted lies, hinted at killing his opponents, admires dictators and said "Hitler did good things". Fundamentally, I think a not-insignificant proportion of the electorate simply will not vote for a female candidate.

Looking at the early voter demographic information, we can see a bit of a pattern. Between 1988 and 2012, the Democrat candidate pulls an average of 44% of male voters, while the Republican candidate pulls around 50%. In the two elections that have featured a female candidate, 2016 and 2024, the share of men voting for the Democrat candidate fell to 41% and 42% respectively. In 2020, that share jumped to 45%. Now, I am aware that circumstances surrounding particular elections have a huge sway on the outcomes and that both candidates were following presidents of their own parties, but it is fascinating to see. It is a trend beyond the presidency too: only 29% of Representatives in the House are women and 25% of Senators. This stands in contrast to other elected houses around the world such as the UK (40.5%), Spain (44.3% & 42.3%), and The Netherlands (38.7% & 40%) to name a few. In fact, the US sits 75th in a list of 183. It seems the American electorate has an issue with electing women.

This may go some way to explaining some weird patterns such as why the male Democrat Governor in North Carolina picked up ~3m more votes than Harris in the same state. I can't quite understand why voters would turn out to vote for one but not the other{{< fn "The [Republican candidate](https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2024-election/mark-robinson-loses-north-carolina-governor-josh-stein-rcna173891) for Governor in NC was... something. An avowed 'black Nazi' and self declared 'pervert', his being on the ballot may have driven voters out." >}}. Realistically, very few people will be voting for a Democrat Governor and Trump as president. On the whole, while Trump looks to sit at a similar level of total votes to last time around, Harris seems to be more than 10m down on Biden; where did these voters go?

## The Electorate
It's easy to look at the noise on social media, or in the traditional media, and think that everyone must be aware of what is happening. But in a country as big as the US, with elections skewed thanks to the Electoral College, the vast sums raised by each campaign get poured into a few select states or races, leaving millions of people to live blissfully out of the campaign crosshairs. We can see this in the fact that searches for "[did Biden drop out](https://www.dailydot.com/debug/did-joe-biden-drop-out-google-trends-search-data-pennsylvania/)" picked up in the week leading up to the election and peaked on election day. Even in a target swing-state such as Wisconsin, fourth highest state by searches, would-be voters were trying to understand the options on the day of the vote.

As far as undecided voters go, for the most part they finally settled on Trump over Harris. This could be the curse of the incumbent–it's easier to choose something different than someone you consider the continuity candidate. On top of that, it is easier to see what Trump stands for, or what he intends to do. A lot of the criticism towards the Harris campaign throughout was that voters didn't know what she stood for, didn't know what her plans were. Trump made his very clear, and although some of them make little sense, voters prefer clarity over vibes. I do struggle to see how one gets to the day of the election with two hugely contrasting candidates and still can not make their mind up.

The biggest movers in electoral terms were young men and Latino men. In Pennsylvania, one of the key swing states, men under 30 favoured Trump by 18 points, reversing a pro-Biden lead of 9 points in 2020. This demographic has been leaning increasingly rightward in recent years, but traditionally does not turn out to vote. The Trump campaign put a lot of work into encouraging these men to the polls, and it seems to have worked: 56% of first time voters picked Trump over 43% for Harris. When it comes to Latino men, Trump picked up 55% of their votes, a massive increase on the 36% in 2020. This swing could be from a number of fronts, firstly, a [surprising number](https://www.reuters.com/world/us/trumps-return-power-fueled-by-hispanic-working-class-voter-support-2024-11-06/) of Latino voters support Trump's hardline immigration policies, and secondly, they are more likely to be from working-class backgrounds, a demographic that has been moving steadily towards the Trump camp for a number of years.

The Democrats have looked upon non-white voters as a guaranteed demographic for too long. They assume the racism and anti-immigration policies of the right will put them off or spark fear. The left-right pendulum swing of politics in South America may shed some light on why the Latino vote is moving towards Trump. Electorates in South America seem to move from one extreme to another in what has been termed the "blue tide" on the right and the "pink tide" on the left. Brazil is a perfect example, moving from a Socialist government in 2016 to the far-right under Bolsonaro and back the left under Lula da Silva. This isn't isolated, it is a trend that occurs time and again across South America. Given around 50% of the immigrant population in the US was born in South or Central America, perhaps these tendencies are spreading to US politics.

## The result
It is worth noting that 2024 is a terrible year for incumbent candidates in elections around the world. In the UK, France, India, Japan, Belgium, Croatia, Bulgaria, Lithuania and Botswana, incumbents lost vote share, a trend not seen so consistently across the globe for decades. It is clear that voters hate inflation, and with the world coming off the tail-end of a global spike, politicians have been unable to persuade voters they have little control over rising prices.

When you account for all of the details discussed above, and throw in the short-term memories of electorates who are quick to forget the realities of life under a certain administration, you can see why voters may have settled on Trump this time around. Ultimately, I stand by the idea that an economically illiterate electorate will lose out to populists when an election is fought on specific economic issues.

When compared with Europe, the US is considerably more individualistic and this is especially evident when it comes to elections. Voters will pick the option they think will serve them and their immediate families best, regardless of any wider harms that candidates may cause. This was not a case of a failed Democrat campaign, the sweeping and consistent shifts across demographics and states attests to that. Any Democrat would have ended up in a similar situation, voters were persuaded that inflation was the fault of the Democrats. Voters felt that Trump would serve them better than Harris.

I don't want to make excuses for the American people. Ultimately, a majority of the voting public picked what they felt was best for themselves and chose a candidate that is constitutionally barred from being President, who does not hide his love of autocrats, and intends to wreak all kinds of horror on minorities. Even if you do struggle to understand the nuances of the economy, a morally just nation would reject a candidate like that without question. Plenty of Americans are either gambling on the fact that they will not be victims of Trump's horrors, or actively support the policies that have shocked so many.

The next four years will be worrying for many. Trump has whittled down his advisors and trusted people to the most devout, he has an action plan ready to implement in Project 2025, he has the favour of the Supreme Court who ruled he can do almost anything he likes without repercussion, and he has America's oligarchs onside in Musk, Bezos and Zuckerberg. He will undoubtedly use the judiciary to his own benefit, crushing the federal investigations into his own actions, and packing courts around the country with sympathetic judges which will reshape the country for decades to come.
