+++
categories = ['Politics','violence','protests','protesting']
title = 'Is violence the answer?'
date = 2023-11-05T18:03:36Z
description = 'Was the toppling of the statue of Edward Colston a violent act, and what did it achieve?'
slug = 'political-engagement'
+++

I recently had an interesting conversation with a colleague at work. We were discussing the toppling of the statue of slave trader Edward Colston in Bristol in 2020 and the circumstances surrounding it. My colleague was sympathetic to the overall aims of the protestors, but believes that politics should be non-violent, and that by crossing the line from a peaceful protest, the protestors muddied and delegitimised their own aims. This view of politics is, in my mind, prohibitively restrictive and narrow.

This belief does match up with the passive nature of British political engagement that has permeated society for decades. We learn that a good citizen is someone that follows the rules, does not kick up a fuss, pays their taxes and votes in elections when asked. This needs to change—politics impacts us all and is something that needs active participation. We need to express our feelings, force the change we need to see and spread the power of politics amongst the population.

Where you stand on this point depends on your view of what counts as politics. Politics does not have a one-size-fits-all definition; It is an abstract concept that means something different to every person that you ask. I see politics as something that surrounds us—it impacts how much money we take home, the education and healthcare we receive, the people we can marry, the spaces we can use and the environment in which we live. Of course it is the political processes such as elections and voting, it is politicians and parliament, and the legislation they pass. But it is much, much more than this, too.

I believe that politics and violence are not mutually exclusive. Violence can be a legitimate form of protest—in places where traditional democratic means of engaging in politics are non-existent, ineffectual or dangerous it can be the only option available to citizens. But when does an act become political and not merely violent? Well, that is another one of those difficult to define areas and one that has different interpretations depending on your personal politics. One person's protest march is another person's violent riot. From my perspective, the toppling of the Colston statue was not a violent act. It was an event that captured the true nature of feeling at a time when the country was attempting to come to grips with its colonial past. When people cannot achieve their political and social goals through elected bodies, what options are open to them? Collective action.

Opposition to the Colston statue was not something that appeared spontaneously and violently during the BLM protests that swept the world in June 2020. Direct action against the statue dates back to the 1990s and in since then, MPs, councillors, activists and the public have all questioned whether it should still stand. Arguments against removing the statue follow a similar vein as groups protesting the removal of civil-war statues in the US—they saw these attempts as trying to re-write history. Stupid, frankly. Statues are erected, with the support of the public, to celebrate people that society feels are deserving of memorialising. To suggest that they should stand indefinitely and survive regardless of what we learn of the person is juvenile. Just as the statue is erected with support of the public, it should be removed if feelings change. History does not live and die in a statue.

When requests were made through legitimate means such as petitions and councillors, nothing changed. Even attempts at something as simple as changing the plaque on the statue to reflect Colston's slave-trading past were slowed by interest groups intent on defending his legacy. For the group that met in June 2020, taking action into their own hands was the only way they felt they could effectively engage in the politics of the matter. In the wake of this event, younger people nationally felt that they had achieved something important. Collective action achieved what activists had attempted to do for decades.

We hear again and again that people are not interested in politics, or that all the parties are the same and so they don't involve themselves in it. This is a huge problem for everyone, and for anyone legitimately interested in politics, greater participation should always be an end goal. We need people involved in politics from every part of society, taking an active interest and shaping the direction of policy. Young protestors spoke of how the events made them feel [empowered](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-bristol-52965803) and described the [righteous]([The fall of Colston's statue: 'It didn’t take long – about four tugs of the ropes' | Bristol | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2020/jun/08/the-fall-of-edward-colston-statue-bristol-it-didnt-even-take-long-about-four-tugs)), rather than violent, atmosphere of the demonstration.

The actions of that day in June were the beginning of a reckoning of the UK's colonial past. Communities across the country began to [ask questions]([Tributes to slave traders and colonialists removed across UK | Slavery | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/jan/29/tributes-to-slave-traders-and-colonialists-removed-across-uk)) about the monuments that surrounded them. Streets and buildings were renamed and statues were removed, despite [attempts]([UK government seems to rule out removal of controversial statues | Politics | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2020/jun/13/removal-of-controversial-statues-winston-churchill-protest)) by the government to stop the efforts. The toppling of the Coslton statue showed that it is not just Parliament and the media that gets to set the narrative. Local, collective action can put control in the hands of the public and tell a fantastic story at the same time.

If we hold the narrow view that violence and politics are mutually exclusive, and closely police what is or isn't violent through stuffy British passivism, we only serve to exclude groups of society from the wider conversation. By expanding our understanding of what politics is, we can engage with it better and ensure favourable outcomes for all. People need to know how much politics impacts their lives, and that by not participating, their views will be left unheard. Political engagement does not need to be violent, but by accepting that it *can be* allows for a better understanding of what politics is, who engages in it and how these people can be effectively represented through traditional means.

Does this mean we need to rethink how we engage younger generations politically? Absolutely. The UK's prevailing two-party system means increasing interest in politics is not an easy task—if people do not relate to one party or the other, they will instead [not vote at all]([How unfair or disproportionate is the UK's voting system for general elections? | British Politics and Policy at LSE](https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/how-unfair-or-disproportionate-is-the-uk%E2%80%99s-voting-system-for-general-elections/)). [Low voter turnout]([Age and voting behaviour at the 2019 General Election - The British Election Study](https://www.britishelectionstudy.com/bes-findings/age-and-voting-behaviour-at-the-2019-general-election/)) in the younger demographics mean that older generations are overrepresented in elections, and because of the inadequacies of first-past-the-post, the political classes will pivot their policies toward the largest voting demographic. This kickstarts a spiral of alienation whereby policies benefitting older generations exclude the younger generations, who feel ignored by the political classes and so stay away from traditional political engagement.

However, social media has allowed for new forms of expression and engagement to grow—petitions can spread like wildfire, contentious issues are debated widely, and organisation of like-minded individuals is much simpler than in years gone by. This rise in new-style politics needs to be capitalised upon and converted into traditional engagement in the form of voting, party membership and people running for office. While the political classes will resist any changes to the fundamentals of the UK political system, incremental change can be achieved if enough people push for it.
